[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey
Mishlove, and this is
part two of our two-part program
on imagery and the alphabet.
With me is Dr.
Leonard Shlain, who
is the head of laparoscopic
surgery at the California
Pacific Medical Center
in San Francisco.
He is also an
associate professor
of surgery at the University
of California Medical
Center in San Francisco.
But most interestingly,
Dr. Shlain
is the author of two books--
"Art and Physics" and "The
Alphabet Versus the Goddess."
Welcome, again, Leonard.
>> Thank you.
I'm glad to be back.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
In part one of our
two-part program,
we talked about the two
hemispheres of the human brain,
and how they're lateralized.
And in most people
who are right-handed,
the left hemisphere is dominant.
And that's the hemisphere
associated with linear thought,
with language, as opposed
to the spatial appreciation
of the right hemisphere.
>> That's correct.
>> And you also developed the
point that in ancient cultures,
almost universally
throughout Europe and Asia,
goddess worship was the
norm, as well as a kind
of egalitarianism
between men and women.
And that roughly, when we
think of recorded history,
it's a time when the
alphabet developed,
the focus on the left
hemisphere developed.
And at the same time, the
goddesses fell into, I suppose,
a dormant state--
historically speaking.
The goddess was
replaced by the god.
>> Correct.
Correct.
I made the point in
the book that it's
a Marshall McLuhan-type
of argument
that the medium is the message.
That the means by which
you perceive information,
the process by which you
perceive information affects
the way your brain works.
And I think that if you
introduce into culture
a form of communication as
radical and revolutionary
is an alphabet-- and the
reason that alphabets
are so revolutionary
compared to,
say, cuneiform or
hieroglyphics, is
that they're so simple to use
and to learn that children can
learn them at a very early age.
And people who have below
average intelligence
can learn how to read and write.
So you suddenly have this
culture-changing medium
that reinforces the left
hemisphere of both men
and women.
And the result of that is
to masculine the culture.
Because the left hemisphere
is the hemisphere
of the brain predominantly
involved in the strategy
of hunting and killing.
All hunters, if they don't kill
their prey, they go hungry.
Now, humans belong to
a category of species
called social predators.
We hunt in packs.
We're like lions and orca
whales and wild dogs and hyenas.
And we are the only
species where the females
don't hunt with the males.
And this is a profound fact
that affects gender relations.
>> It has to do, I suppose,
with the long length of time it
takes for an infant to develop.
Absolutely.
You can't take a
crying baby on a hunt.
And because of the prolonged
period of child-raising,
then you had a divergence
in the male and female
of the human species,
which then got
reflected in the manner
with which their brains are
organized.
So that women have a
different way of knowing,
a different way of
communicating, a different way
of relating than men do.
And we know, for instance,
that women have 10% to 33%
more neurons in the anterior
part of the commissure, which
is the corpus callosum,
which connects the right
and left hemispheres.
Well, if somebody has
more neurons connecting
the right and the
left, then you would
infer from that, that the
left hemisphere, which
is your language
lobe, is more in touch
with the right hemisphere,
which has many emotions in it.
So I don't think that
there's very many men that
would argue with the fact
that women are probably
better than men at
expressing their emotions.
Now, you might think
that that would
put the men at a disadvantage.
But when a man is engaged in the
most dangerous activity called
the hunt, to not have
emotions spilling over
from the other side, to be cool
and dispassionate about hunting
allows him to carry
out his task and kill
what it is that he was hunting.
So you have these two
strategies to survive--
gathering and nurturing,
and hunting and killing.
Now the good news
is is that they're
combined in every human being.
Every man has a
gathering/nurturing side,
every woman has a
hunting/killing side.
And in the main,
hunter and killers
can be found more often
among men, and in the main,
gatherers and nurturers can
be found best among women.
>> And in tribal societies, I
gather these two functions were
quite well together.
>> Right.
And that's the way we
lived for 2,990,000 years.
That was the design of all
hunter/gatherer communities.
And then about 10,000
years ago, somewhere,
some place, some
time somebody noticed
that seeds dropped
in the kitchen midden
were growing grain when they
came back the following year.
And they said if we plant
these intentionally and take
care of this, then we'll have
a guaranteed food supply.
And about the same time,
the men said, why are we
risking our lives trying
to hunt these wild boars
and getting gored?
Why don't we build a
corral and domesticate them
and raise pigs?
And then we won't
be at any risk.
So husbandry and agriculture
changed the human equation.
Because suddenly, instead
of hunting and killing,
all of the feminine aspects
of gathering and nurturing
came to the fore.
So there really
isn't a whole lot
of difference between
raising a young child,
and looking out for them, and
making sure that they're clean,
and that they've got
fresh water to drink,
and that they're
out of harm's way,
and protecting stocks of
grain that are growing.
Or feeding your
flocks and making sure
that they're healthy.
So what happened
between 10,000 years ago
and 5,000 years ago is that
all the spirits winnowed
to become one person, one
spirit-- one dominant spirit
called an Earth goddess.
And both men and
women prayed to her.
Because you better.
Because if there was drought
or pestilence or blight,
you're all going to starve.
So we find evidence in every
pre-literate agricultural
society that's
ever been studied,
with very few exceptions,
people worshipped the goddess.
And then, beginning
5,000 years ago,
she starts losing power to
this sun-lover husband who
was usually weaker, smaller.
He usually died every
year in an accident.
She brought him
back in the spring.
And then he starts
getting all pumped up,
and he becomes much
stronger than she is.
And then she begins to lose her
power, and then she disappears.
And my question
is, what happened?
What event in culture could
have been so immense and so
pervasive as to change
the sex of the god?
And I maintain that
it was an inside job.
It was their change
in mental programming
as a result of learning a new
means of communication that
was linear and sequential
and reductionist.
Let me give you an example.
In ancient Greece, there
were two societies.
There were Athens and Sparta.
Now the Athenians
and the Spartans
lived very close to each other.
They spoke the same language.
They wrote the same language.
They worshiped the same gods.
They were both bellicose.
And yet, the Athenians
were the home
of the first extended
experience in democracy.
The Athenians sat
around and discussed
the aesthetics of art.
They were the first culture to--
playwrights and
historians and the most
magnificent contributions
to Western civilization
come from Athens.
Sparta was a militaristic,
fascist society
that did not leave
for posterity,
a single historical,
literary, or
philosophical accomplishment.
Now you would say, well, let's
see how these two cultures
treated women.
So you would assume that
the women would fare better
in Athens.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> That's not the case.
Actually, Athenian
women were banned
from owning property, which,
of course, is the key to power.
They were subservient
to the men.
They couldn't participate
in public life.
They weren't educated.
And Spartan women actually
were educated fairly similar
to boys--
the girls were.
A Spartan woman could have a
child by more than one man.
She ruled in his absence.
And by the fourth
century, Spartan women
own 2/5 of all the
property in Sparta.
What was the difference
between these two cultures?
One was-- the most
glaring was their attitude
towards the written word.
One despised it and the
other one glorified it.
And I maintain that
if you follow history
and you go through and you
see how in the Dark Ages,
the people of Europe began to--
this phenomenon occurred
of the most sacred object
in the church
being a black Mary.
And it's a strange development
when you go across--
it extended from
Russia to Spain, Italy,
throughout the Mediterranean.
Today you can go to Europe
and you'll find these statutes
>> The Black Madonna.
And why would a Caucasian,
largely blue-eyed,
blond-haired peoples make their
sacred object a Black Madonna?
>> Well, why?
>> And I would think that
the Earth Goddess was black.
Isis--
>> Was kind of a
rebirth of the Earth.
But why at that time?
>> Well, because people had lost
the ability to read and write.
Throughout secular
Europe-- who was it?
I'm blanking his name now.
But the estimates were that
no king or nobleman could read
or write for hundreds of years.
>> During the Dark Ages.
>> And it wasn't
until Charlemagne,
that he started to institute
reforms that brought back
literacy.
>> Well, in part one of our
two-part program we did cover
this issue in Western
culture, the Mesopotamians,
the Egyptians, the Middle Ages.
Many people, I think, would
come back at you, Leonard,
and say, well, how about Asia?
Here they had a picture
language-- ideographs--
and yet, they also
developed a harsh treatment
of their females.
>> I maintain that on the
spectrum of communication,
from oral speech on one side
to written communication,
the alphabet on the other
side, that any form of written
communication-- whether it's
hieroglyphics or ideographic
writing--
is much closer to alphabets
than it is to oral speech.
But the Chinese culture
developed a unique form
of writing called ideographs
about the same time
that the West
developed the alphabet.
And I believe that that
shaped Chinese culture.
Now interestingly
enough, in ancient China,
there were two
philosophical systems that
emerged almost simultaneously.
One was Lao-Tzu's Taoism.
And the other one
was Confucianism,
based on Confucius.
Now Taoism was a very feminine
belief system, which said,
you know, wise man doesn't
try to control anything.
Make no dams.
Passivity is the most
important principle.
Confucianism, on the
other hand, believed
that a man needed to
control his emotions first,
his wife second, and
his children third.
And this hierarchy was the
unit basis for all of society,
that if that didn't hold, that
all of society would crumble.
So Taoism and Confucianism
were like two interweaving sine
waves throughout
Chinese history.
>> And the Taoists, as I recall,
were really against literacy.
>> Yes.
And then the most
remarkable event occurred.
And that was in
1923, the Chinese
invented the printing press.
And of course,
their printing press
never became like the west's
because a printing press
that depends on
ideographic characters
meant that the printer had
to have huge inventory.
>> Thousands of block letters.
>> Thousands of blocks,
as opposed to Gutenberg,
who only needed 26 bins.
But nevertheless, literacy
rates soared in China.
And the Sung Dynasty began,
which, of course, gave us
these wonderful porcelains
and art and philosophers.
And if I were to ask you what
is the most misogynist thing
that the Chinese men
did to their women,
you would, say,
well, foot binding.
Foot binding, sure.
>> So when would you
think the first episode,
the first recorded case of foot
binding occurred in this 5,000
year period of Chinese history?
>> Within a few decades.
>> Exactly.
970 was the first recorded case.
And if you think
about it, foot binding
was a very strange fetish
because the men suddenly
decided that a hobbled woman
was a sexy woman, that bending
a young, growing girl's
foot back and making
her walk on the tops of her toes
so that she could barely walk
was something desirable.
Now if you think about it,
the printing press presses.
And what was done
to women's feet
were that they were pressed.
And the strips of linen
that were used to make paper
were the strips of linen that
were used to bind the feet.
So somehow or
other, the metaphors
of this new communication
technology somehow or other
leaked over into culture and
became this bizarre fetish.
>> Well, let me ask
you another question.
We had a chance to
discuss this earlier,
and I don't think
it's in your book,
but it seems
relevant to me, which
is I've had a chance to visit
Papua, New Guinea, where we
have people who lived under
what we think of as Stone Age
conditions until the 1930s.
And when these tribes
were first discovered,
they seemed to be very
misogynist, very strong male
ethic in that culture.
And yet they were
completely pre-literate.
>> Yes.
I think that you have to be
very cautious when you look for
and find extremes.
I mean, the fact that they were
Stone Age in the 20th century
says something.
Most people were not Stone
Age in the 20th century.
Why were they Stone
Age that long?
And also, you have to be very
careful that western culture
anthropologists and influences
have leaked into that culture
and corrupted it.
So we're not exactly
sure that studying
these people and their
habits is a fair reflection
of the way they used to be.
All it takes is one literate
person in a community
to change that community.
And there's a saying that
in the valley of the blind,
the one-eyed man is king.
And I'm aware, and I
want to make it clear,
that I don't believe that we've
ever discovered that there's
a matriarchal
society, that there's
a society where women had more
or even equal power to men.
But there certainly have
been enough studies by now
to indicate that there are a
lot of pre-literate agricultural
societies in which women's
status is a lot higher than it
had been in the literate
societies of Western Europe.
>> You use the American
Indians as an example of that.
>> Yeah.
There were Plains Indians
that had a tradition
that only the wise women of the
tribe could elect the chief.
Just imagine if we structured
our society today on a policy
that only women of a
certain age could vote.
What kind of society
would we have?
What kind of priorities
So the Iroquois Nation was
so advanced and peaceful
in its conflict resolution that
Benjamin Franklin recommended
incorporating many of the
Iroquois Nation's institutions
into our United
States Constitution.
In fact, we're always kind of
claiming we got it from Europe
and refined it.
But in point of fact, that's not
exactly true, or not completely
true.
>> And one of the points that
you're making is not only do we
have this precedent, but
in the last 100 years,
especially here in
a western society,
we are returning
more to the image.
And at the same
time, people talk
about the rise of the goddess.
>> Absolutely.
Just look at this
phenomenon of Diana.
Diana was created
by photographers,
and she was maybe even
killed by photographers.
But it was her image
that absolutely
captivated the world.
And at her death,
people talked about her
in mythological terms.
They said, it's a Greek tragedy.
It's a fairy tale.
And the qualities that
touched so many people
were her vulnerability, her
compassion, her openness,
things that are associated
with the feminine.
So the worldwide outpouring
for the death of this princess,
I don't think, would have been
possible in any other time
other than a time where we
are so saturated with images,
that we have image
information that--
we're bombarded with it.
I was in New York recently,
and I was walking down
Fifth Avenue, and there was
a five-foot story billboard
of some ad for some
clothing manufacturer,
and this image of this
woman on the street.
And I think to
myself, this is not
the way most people
hardly ever saw
images, other than the images
that they would see regularly.
That was not the way
they communicated.
>> And there's definitely now
a tendency for women to have
greater and greater equality
social relationships.
>> Well, as I mentioned
on the last show,
I don't think it's a coincidence
that the first feminist
movement in 5,000 years just
happened to be in the first
television generation.
And the fact that the boys
of that generation, many
of the men were supportive
of the women's aspirations,
this speaks to the fact
that something changed.
I remember in 1958, when I
was graduating from University
of Michigan, at the time
the president of Harvard
gave a speech that
was later in "Time"
magazine about how this
was the silent generation.
And he said that he
felt that television
had made us so passive that
the status of the democracy
was under siege.
Well, he said, if you think
that this group is passive,
just wait a few years until the
real generation that was raised
and television reaches college.
Well, of course, the
counterculture of the '60s just
blew everything apart, and it
ran absolutely the opposite
of what everybody predicted.
And these rug rats
turned couch potatoes
and who watched "The Howdy
Doody Show" actually became
social activists and
initiated great social change.
>> And the anti-war movement.
>> Yes, exactly.
So I mean, you could say
demographics and the pill
and a bunch of other things
were certainly influential.
But it was a phenomenon
that was like a Renaissance.
And now we're sort of going
through a mini-Reformation
in that we're swinging back to a
much more left hemispheric mode
of literalism, fundamentalism,
and a reading of society that's
based on the literal
interpretation of scripture.
>> Sort of as a reaction
against the rise of the image.
>> Yes, exactly.
But it will swing again.
It'll swing again.
>> Well, it's as if
from your perspective,
if I look at human society,
we've been in a 5,000-year
cycle in which the
god has dominated,
just as the left
hemisphere has dominated.
And right now may be the time
when the pendulum is starting
to swing the other way.
>> Well, you know,
Nietzsche said in 1888,
he said God is dead.
And the god he was talking
about was that old patriarch
with the long white
beard up on the cloud.
But a few years earlier
the Catholic church
declared that Mary had been born
by immaculate conception, which
elevated her from the
mortal to above the moral
to almost divine.
So the question comes
is, why is this happening
at this particular time?
I mean, photography
and electromagnetism
were discovered
earlier in the century.
And I maintain in my book
that the combinations
of photography and
electromagnetism,
first photography, then
film, then television, then
computer graphics, the internet
have been just transforming
society.
>> It reminds me of a bumper
sticker I see from time to time
that says "The Goddess is alive.
Magic is afoot."
>> Yes.
Well, it's interesting
that in film, we
started referring
to the women who
were actresses as goddesses.
We started calling them
sirens or sorceresses
or enchantresses.
We began using all the
mythological terminology that
had been used 5,000
years ago and hadn't been
heard in the last 5,000 years.
And I want to remind you that
the worst period for women
in the entire history
of recorded civilization
was during the period of
steeply rising alphabet literacy
rates in Europe following
Gutenberg's printing press.
The witch hunts never
occurred anywhere outside
of civilized Europe.
Russia, which remained
largely illiterate,
did not have witch hunts.
The Muslim countries that
bordered Europe, and Bosnia,
and all along that whole
border, they didn't have witch
hunts because they weren't
impacted by the printing press.
The witch hunts
were the most severe
in Germany and Switzerland,
France and England,
and the countries
that were giving us
Shakespeare and Galileo
and Newton and Bach.
>> What an incredible discovery
you've made, Leonard Shlain.
This is provocative, and
it hits us sort of right
between the eyes, in a sense.
We're surrounded
by the alphabet,
but we rarely stop to think of
the impact that it's had on us.
>> Yeah.
It's hard when you're--
like you said earlier, it's
not fish who discover water.
We're entangled in this
skein of written words.
>> We're out of time, too.
But thanks so much
for being with me.
>> Good.
Thank you very much.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]